tonight how much can we believe about
the enemies of the United States in
Angola 10 years ago and in Nicaragua
today we hear accounts of communist
expansion but are such stories true
tonight two former CIA officers tell
reporter Christopher hurt allies
invented about Angola and Nicaragua
found their way into the world's press
two experienced journalists tell him the
difficulties they've had telling fact
from fiction some people call this
process disinformation others call it
lying the CIA just call it a standard
technique the sandanista dictatorship of
Nicaragua with full Cuban Soviet bloc
support not only persecutes its people
the church and denies a free press but
arms and provides bases for communist
terrorists attacking neighboring states
as they you know the saying that they
have is that this has been said publicly
by the way by the US government
spokesman that our intelligence from
Nicaragua is so good you know we can
hear the toilets flush in Managua I've
often thought that that might be the
source of some of this information
Angola a country at war rich in natural
resources as large as France and Spain
together a left-wing government
supported by the Cubans fights a
continual battle against a guerilla army
backed by the South Africans ten years
ago the Russians and their allies sent
troops and guns into a continent where
they had no right to be according to the
newspapers at the time that's how the
Angolan war started or did it john
stockwell worked for the CIA for 12
years rising to the rank of colonel his
last assignment was to run America's
secret campaign in Angola we had set
ourselves well above and beyond the law
beyond the Congress beyond the
Constitution we were lying to the
president lying to the Secretary of
State lying to the Congress about what
we were doing 1974 the Portuguese
Revolution the end of centuries of
dictatorship and oppression at home and
a Portuguese imperialism in Africa but
as the colonies gained independence in
the largest Angola three groups vied for
control of one of the richest countries
in Africa Jonas Savimbi a friend of
trade Guevara but now in anti-marxist
led UNITA Agostinho Neto a Western
educated left winger led the MPLA Holden
Roberto led the FNLA he had been on the
payroll of the CIA for 14 years so he
was the obvious choice for the seasoned
campaigners back in Washington the CIA
had just closed down three long-term
paramilitary operations in Southeast
Asia Vietnam Cambodia and Laos State had
over a thousand paramilitary case
officers come flocking back to why
they didn't have desks for everybody
much less jobs and morale was
rock-bottom low they wanted a covert
action they wanted a paramilitary
encounter Angola was convenient there
never was a study done of who's who in
Angola who would be best friend gola who
would be best for the CIA or for the
United States or there was no study done
well the rationale was that the Soviet
Union was trying to take advantage of
the United States weakness right after
the Vietnam War that Angola was getting
its independence and they were trying to
snap it out Henry Kissinger decided that
we could not be weak and we wouldn't let
them do it our own files disproved that
we moved into Angola first and Russians
were responding to us but before the CIA
could start a war on the other side of
the world in Angola it needed the
approval of the National Security
Council a key part of the American
decision-making machine where policy is
made by the top men in the government
and the military the first briefings on
Angola literally when gentlemen this is
a map of Africa
here is Angola and then they went on
with a chart to explain their three
liberation movements in Angola one of
them is headed by Holden Roberto he's
the good guy we've worked with him for
years and I use literally good guy then
the the MPLA is headed by this drunken
psychotic Marxist poet Agustin Annette
too he's the bad guy and I used exactly
the to make sure that people understood
and then you know you'd like to say you
pack off and go off that up and they
come in for the next briefing about
Micronesia or somewhere the
superficiality of what I saw I saw fat
old men dozing off and subcommittee
meetings of the National Security
Council in which we were making
decisions that were getting people
killed and I mean exactly the way
students do in their nine o'clock class
you know propping themselves up and
getting the glasses balance of look
you know people can't tell if they're in
their heads not even long and then you'd
have to wake them up sort of to get
their their concurrence on sigh explain
something to him again but the
newspapers contain nothing about the
fascinating way in which policy was made
instead they fell victim to Stockwell's
worldwide campaign of disinformation the
basic theme was to make it look like a
Russian and Cuban aggression in Angola
and so any kind of story that you could
write and get into the media anywhere
that that pushed that line you did one
third of my staff in this task force was
corporate action was propagandist whose
professional career jobs was making up
stories and finding ways to get him into
the press from the CIA's headquarters
Stockwell put his propagandists into
London Lisbon
moussaka and Kinshasa from the safety of
such cities none of which are actually
in Angola
they wrote press releases for the FNLA
and UNITA which were head into the
ticker tapes of the Western media the
propagandists assiduously courted
Western journalists briefing them on
wining and dining them his man in Lusaka
was particularly enthusiastic he ran a
story that the city of Milan G had been
captured by the UNITA forces and in
doing so it captured 20 Russian advisers
and they thought this would show that
Russians were running the thing in
Angola
there weren't Russian advisers it wasn't
a factor we knew that so I went to the
British Museum's newspaper library to
see how successful Stockwell had been
and here's the story in The Guardian
under the headline UNITA captures 20
Russians the UNITA statement with all
its convincing detail is quoted at
length and according to this there were
500 Russians and other mercenaries
involved in the battle there were two
tanks and three armored cars and even a
house full of arms of Russian make the
Guardian put quotes around the headline
to show they weren't quite sure of the
story and presumably that's why they put
a question mark after this hopeful
little piece the Milan G story also made
it to the front
of the times which quotes Unitas claimed
that they captured 20 Russians in the
battle for Milan gee the times clearly
believed UNITA because they helpfully
tell us that Milan G used to be under
the control of the MPLA the source for
this story was the Reuters correspondent
in Lusaka III remember reporting that
very clearly I should stress I was not
the only journalist to report it many of
us reported it and we weep ended on an
official you need a communicate but
years later I discovered that um a
little CIA misinformation expert at
certain the US Embassy in moussaka and
that compose that communique and it bore
absolutely no relationship at all to
truth when you reported it did you think
it was I had absolutely no idea I mean
you've got to remember that stage during
a war you're working under incredible
pressure I I worked for four months
without a day or a 16 hours a day and
all what was wanted was a flow of
information I mean I I'd done the same
in the Middle East war I I was based in
Damascus and in the first week of the
war in Damascus I I wiped out the
Israeli Air Force three times over with
official statements Reuters is one of
the world's largest news agencies its
offices around the globe provide many
papers with their only source of news
from some parts of the world many papers
actually rely on the same person for
their information the Reuters
correspondent well I mean with hindsight
some of the official statements from the
side I was reporting and I stressed from
the side I was reporting but also from
the side that people in in Luanda with
the MPLA report clearly most of those
statements were completely false
most of them are completely false
everything so this doesn't that mean
that for the average reader we received
absolutely impossibly distorted view of
what
I think that's a very fair assessment
but newspapers were hungry for stories
and one was Stockwell's propagandists
fed them well so he came up with another
story which he in fact kept going for
weeks and it was a good story in terms
of the sea-ice propaganda interest he
had some Cuban soldiers raping some
young angle and girls then there was a
battle and he had that Cuban eunuch cut
off and captured and then he had the
Cuban women the victims identifying
their rapist and then there was a trial
and they were convicted and then he had
them executed by a firing squad of the
women who had supposedly been violated
with photographs of young African women
with weapons shooting down these Cubans
there had never been a rape there had
never been the military action the
Cubans had never been captured it was
all fiction Stockwell did extremely well
with this story here's the Daily Express
of March the 12th 1976 young girls
execute cuban rapists is the headline
I'm quoting from UNITA it says that 17
Cubans were executed five of whom had
been identified as the people who had
raped four African women a few weeks
before and here's the Evening Standard
with a bit more convincing detail
saying the Cubans were shot with their
own guns and here's the Daily Telegraph
the newspaper of record adding a bit
more detail identifying the region from
which the women came and saying that
they took part in the executions the
reporter was John Bullock I haven't the
faintest idea where it was true and I
never said it was true I reported
somebody as saying that as telling me
that story I certainly didn't report the
facts I reported mr. a or sources from
such and such a group as saying that I
don't know whether it was true if you
don't publish it maybe it is true you
get I should have thought worse
criticism for not publishing it and for
publishing it because when you publish
it you do attribute it quite clearly and
firmly
person saying so if you don't publish it
you're already making a judgement you're
deciding it's not true it's not our job
to decide editors are not going and in
most Western newspapers are not going to
be too skeptical of Cuban rapists story
it sort of fits the general Western line
and what the West wants to read about
Cuba and what not the truth is all of
the information we were getting was that
the Cubans were handling themselves
brilliantly and very generously towards
the Africans
basically and put it very clue crudely
you can publish any old crap you like
and it will get some get some newspaper
room
despite the CIA's best efforts the
armies they supported never stood much
of a chance once Cuban soldiers arrived
in the autumn of 1975 to help the MPLA
Holden Roberto's FNLA and his CIA
mercenaries were wiped out you need to
run the South Africans beat a hasty
retreat back in Washington Congress
didn't want another Vietnam and stopped
Kissinger from spending any more money
in Angola interestingly some American
multinationals operating in the country
had always supported the MPLA but when
the corporation's expressed their views
to the American government they were
treated as the enemy when we went in
Gulf oil was pumping the Angolan oil
we forced Gulf to stop the way we did
this was by Henry Kissinger placing some
phone calls and saying that he would
open an investigation of international
bribery by Gulf oil company
the fighting was effectively over in
about February of 76 the Congress
stopped us then and forced us to
withdraw by early March within about
three weeks Gulf oil was back with us
technicians in Kubuntu pumping the
Angolan oil with Cuban soldiers
protecting them from CIA mercenaries who
were still mucking around in northern
Angola
now years later Western corporations are
doing business great with Angola David
Rockefeller Gulf Boeing Texaco is
building refinery there the beers you
know working with the diamonds they all
lobby in Washington saying they have no
problem doing business with the
government of Angola but the war still
goes on with the South Africans
financing UNITA the Americans have
turned their attention elsewhere to
Nicaragua
unlike Angola this is a country which
any journalist can visit so America's
lies can be discovered more easily but
these have still dominated the papers
first there was the arms flow story
according to Reagan Nicaragua supplied
guns to the left-wing guerrillas in
neighboring El Salvador
David McMichael was the CIA's senior
analyst on Nicaragua they asked him to
write a report on the arms flow but when
he looked at the evidence it didn't
support reagan's claims the the argument
that we're dealing with here is do these
arms come through or from Nicaragua with
the complicity of the Nicaraguan
government and the evidence does not
sustain that undeterred the American
government continues to insist that
Nicaragua is a center of international
communist terrorism according to Reagan
it harbors members of the IRA the Red
Brigades the baader-meinhof gang and
Basque separatists so the American
government has poured money into
supporting the opponents of the
Nicaraguan regime we have an obligation
to be of help where we came to freedom
fighters lovers of freedom and democracy
from Afghanistan to Nicaragua the
freedom fighters he is talking about I
call the Contras only they wouldn't
exist without the CIA they would they
simply would not exist as a viable force
the Contras never even received the
money themselves to buy arms that was
all handled for them by Thai the CIA and
there's just no there's no there's no
way out of saying that the Contra force
is essentially and almost entirely a
creation of the United States government
the clunkers are agents of the United
States government since we have been
there since the very end of 1981 until
now has been a constant escalation of
the war in to our area and there's been
a great deal of real terrorism going on
in the area we have mass kidnappings
we've had whole villages that have been
swept down on and they take everyone
women children men animals everything
that moves we have had rapes and
kidnappings torture murder about
everything that one could imagine that
could happen in a war and this has been
carried out by the Contra that is you
know that a standard technique in you
know in attempting to destabilize and
overthrow a government is to demonstrate
the citizens that government to the
citizens that its government cannot
provide security for them and this is
this is the way to break resistance and
this is this is what they do this is the
famous CIA manual doc I on you know laid
this out very clearly for them
integration I hate to say it in this
cold-blooded way of it is a standard
technique to help the CIA has produced a
freedom fighters manual this shows how
to make Molotov cocktails how to throw
them and who to throw them at it gives
helpful advice on disrupting transport
and communications and destroying
property
other standard techniques are aimed at
people I'm very embarrassed by the
United States support for the Contra and
I think it is it is illegal and immoral
they don't call Ronald Regan Ronald they
call him and Donna
Regan which is a play on the word to
donation because everything they have is
from him they are our brothers these
freedom fighters and we owe them our
health
they are the moral equal of our founding
fathers and the brave men and women of
the French Resistance we cannot turn
away from them well brothers I suppose
brothers and sisters we all are of the
same God in that sense certainly I
wouldn't classify them as freedom
fighters or as the moral equivalent of
our founding fathers in the United
States in 1981 the CIA asked McMichael
for a report on the Nicaraguan press
opposition parties and church and my
conclusion was that you know there was a
significant space for these for these
groups to operate but that they were in
no in no danger of suppression or
disappearance compared to any other
Central American country Nicaragua has
by far the liveliest opposition press
and media over two-thirds for example
the 40-yard radio stations in the
country are still privately owned and
generally speak their mind when Michael
spoke his mind the CIA didn't like it he
was sacked
the sandanista dictatorship of Nicaragua
with full Cuban Soviet bloc support not
only persecutes its people the church
and denies a free press but arms and
provides bases for communist terrorists
attacking neighboring states I certainly
don't recognize any of the diatribes
that have been made against the
Sandinistas as to the persecution of the
church persecution of people's the
denial of human rights that is not in my
experience after four years of fighting
the Americans the Nicaraguan government
has now suspended for most civil rights
in the world's newsrooms they are more
inclined to listen to the president of
America than to the president of
Nicaragua so in the propaganda battle
the CIA's inventions still hit the front
page in 1982 they produced convincing
evidence of Soviet bases in the
coagulant
used to laugh and say look at that
Soviet style baseball diamond over there
is nothing you know this is this is
almost foolish really you know to talk
about this first of all they're not
Soviet military bases that's that's the
whole point the second is that the
barracks is a barracks you know an
obstacle course is an obstacle course
how about this for a story just under a
year ago the Americans discovered a
Soviet freighter carrying MIG fighter
planes which they said were on their way
to Nicaragua here's the story on the
front of the Times
Moscow warned on Nicaraguan MiG's and
there's a picture of a mig-21 according
to President Reagan this showed that
Nicaragua was a threat to the United
States and as it turned out this was the
evidence for this was based on satellite
photography which showed crates an East
European port facility which were
determined to be in the science of
crateology the crates of the sort in
which MIG aircraft frequently were
shipped and subsequent photographs that
they are to later showed that these
crates had were no longer on the dock an
amazing leap of logic it was advanced
that necessarily they must
being delivered to to Nicaragua where
we're on their way to be delivered at
Nicaragua well the you know the usual
thing the charge makes the headlines the
retraction makes the inside pages eight
or ten days later it's revealed well
MiG's weren't on the way but that's no
longer a headline so what one is left
with is the overall impression from the
screaming headlines of the week earlier
that Nicaragua continues to represent
this enormous danger to the security
United States this nation of three
million impoverished Souls half of whom
are under the age of 15 you know I would
I would say people are very silly if
they believe everything that newspapers
tell them and I think probably anybody
but who buys a newspaper needs a course
on how to read newspapers part of my
reason for coming out of the CIA is that
it was a tragedy a travesty of US
principles of freedom and democracy that
you would have the United States setting
up a tradition of supporting
dictatorships brutal ones training
forming and training their brutal police
and death squads while the Soviet Union
which has had periods of pretty harsh
policies towards its own people is
winding up the champion of real freedom
throughout the world if you have a
dictator and you want some help getting
rid of him you cannot go to the United
States you can go to the Soviet Union
people in the foreign policy
establishment just put it this way and I
believe this is not only true of my own
country but many others you know our
believe that any interest of national
policy that it is legitimate to lie they
do not feel it is dishonorable to lie
and when they do lie well they expect to
be rewarded for it